the following video is made possible by
audible
[Music]
in February of 2010 2k games released
Bioshock 2 and received some pretty
positive reviews except from one
unfortunate demographic gamers with
colorblindness a hacking minigame
requires you to mash a button when the
needles over a certain color hit it on
green you'll succeed and hit it on the
red and you'll set off a terrible alarm
in the original game's version the two
colors were indistinguishable too many
players with deuteron Opia more commonly
known as red-green color blindness or
just green blindness in the days before
Twitter Tumblr and Facebook it was an
independent gaming blog called believe
it or not negative gamer that
popularized this story with lists of
photoshopped images simulating what this
hacking minigame looks like to the
colorblind the story made the rounds
across Kotaku Engadget Rock Paper
Shotgun and such eventually to MTV News
and depending on which version you were
playing it would take about a year of
technical difficulties and maybe a DLC
purchase to fix the problem there were a
number of variables that caused this
problem to blow up in 2010 in particular
the move to HD graphics means smaller
text busier screen spaces more detailed
and cluttered environments all on flat
panel HD displays that washout colors
and bright and blacks also consider the
particular shades of red and green that
the developers chose here more
oversaturated contrasting shades would
have been more visible to colorblind
players but two years before in 2008
left4dead released with one of the first
colorblind modes in memory so it makes
sense the 2010 is when it started to
seem strange that a highly anticipated
triple-a sequel the sequel to Bioshock
funded by grand theft auto's publisher
no less released with the problem that 1
out of 10 of their play testers should
have been able to spot and report
Bioshock 2 was not the first game to
have this problem but it might have been
the most popular one before Bioshock
there was a need to differentiate the
blue and purple Outen Borderlands the
blue and purple blocks blending together
in Puyo Puyo diamonds and lapis looking
almost exactly the same in Minecraft
bullets and weird nd Japanese shmups
blending into the background and the
charging LEDs is this green or yellow I
don't actually know it's the same
problem and puzzle fighter between the
green and the orange blocks er door are
these dark yellow I don't know either
those are a few
examples of games that have given me
problems because I also have red-green
color blindness the severity depends on
the individual but for a handful of
games this does create a real delay in
processing speed that creates a real
handicap hopefully this footage Apulia
Puyo tetra speaks for itself I am a
beast in one of those games and just
cannot keep up the pace for the other
one so I can't do the puyopuyo part of
puyo puyo Tetris well but I'm apparently
lucky enough to make out the colors in
Bioshock 2's hacking minigame this isn't
a problem that's really affected me in
many ways outside of the handful of
games that require me to quickly pick
blue from purple or bright green from
yellow but what's missing is a more
shapely identifier like if they had
jagged edges with a unique texture kind
of like how bejeweled does it but it
turns out that Puyo Puyo Tetris does
have a colorblind mode of sorts though
it's more like a workaround it's an
upgrade shop that turns the blocks into
shaped letters that even then the shapes
are too bubbly and smooth to be
instantly recognizable just at a glance
I still feel like I'm much slower this
than I'm supposed to be the first thing
everyone assumes about colorblindness is
that that means you see in black and
white that's only true for like less
than 1% of people when you clarify that
it's more about red-green color
blindness the thing 10% of men have it's
more like their different shades of a
fairly similar hue I can tell these
colors apart when the tiles are right
next to each other side by side but
making that judgment across the whole
stack when they're spread apart is nigh
impossible that's when I'm gonna start
to slow down here's a comparison between
what this supposedly looks like to
normal people and what it looks like to
me but you know both of them look
exactly the same to me and I just got a
trust that I have the right one on the
screen really though it's not that bad
I'm sure I'm capable of living a long
happy healthy normal life without being
able to play a handful of match for
puzzle games but I'd like to ponder over
the question of nature versus nurture
when it comes to wondering why I never
had a big interest in visual art or
design I don't know I'm sure I made some
weird coloring choices on the channel
sometimes but hell screw YouTube
apparently you can be an accomplished
game designer for three decades with so
much colorblindness that you're almost
monochromatic fallout founder Tim Cain
made sure that the outer worlds could be
played without the need to distinguish a
whole lot of reds from greens or yellows
or
lose from purples it's a common enough
condition that there's actually a pretty
respectable number of colorblind
developers out there and I managed to
get the guy who did the GDC talk on it
creative Assembly's Douglas pinnate
hello and thanks for having a chat first
of all could you tell us who you are and
what you do okay so uh my name is
Douglas pennant and I am a development
manager Creative Assembly how did you
first find out that you were colorblind
I think some of my earliest memories of
having color trouble was being at school
and drawing pictures so I would draw a
picture of a whale in the sea and the
kids who had asked me like Doug Weiss to
see purple and I would say it's dark
blue yeah I get the feeling you might
have been through this a similar thing
yeah yeah exactly what other activities
does deuteron Opia affect anything real
serious or life-changing outside of
games or coloring or recognizing blushes
although close to blushing there was one
which was kind of serious once where I
had someone in front of me who was kind
of feeling a bit faint but I couldn't
see the blood draining out of his face
oh my god
yeah he was going white as a sheet an
icon there was no distinction in my eyes
it was only until when someone else
walked in looks at it took one look and
said oh my god I'm getting the nurse
that I realized oh something's something
should be obvious but it isn't the games
in particular that were at the turning
point of this awareness are left for
dead in battlefield 3 and Bioshock 2
then that's from 2008 to 2011 I am I'm
wondering if the switch over to flat
panel displays which do infamously have
less color information and and brighter
blacks if that might be something you've
heard of if I think about why I think
we've noticed it more recently I think
it's because of the development and
increase in the complexity of the games
we play both in terms of game mechanics
but also in terms of art so I think of
Unreal Tournament for example
so the original Unreal Tournament was
clear as day like an enemies were red
friendlies were blue and and the
environments were basically brown or
gray the environments were really quite
simple they were as good as they could
be at the time but they were effectively
limited to a very readable state whereas
now there are more opportunities for
realism so playing Unreal Tournament 3
now if I do that I have to sometimes
have trouble distinguishing red players
from the environment because there is in
the simplest way lots more art going on
on both the player and the environment
you know all this talk on bodily
autonomy and bodily anomalies is getting
me in the mood to rave about one of my
favorite activities these days running
on the treadmill playing Tetris zoning
out while listening to an audiobook from
our sponsor audible.com where I recently
finished listening to Homer's Odyssey as
read by Sir Ian McKellen an entire
career can be spent tracing how this
3000 year old epic influences modern pop
culture with videogame tropes being a
glaring descendant of Homeric heroism
and with Ian McKellen's voice it's like
having Gandalf read you an ancient book
of lore except all the world-building
you do here is real-life sign up for a
30-day free trial at audible.com slash
super bunny hop or this is new tech
super bunny hop to you 500 - 500 for a
mobile link each month you choose one
audiobook plus two audible originals you
can exchange any title at any time and
you keep your library forever even if
you cancel so once again that's
audible.com slash super bunny hop for
one free month thanks again and let's
get on with the show I'm writing this in
the late 2010s about a problem that
became better known in the early 2010's
and despite the directions the industry
has gone on over the past decade despite
the greed the gambling the crunch time
the tax dodging and all the examples of
immaturity and incompetence we
constantly see accessibility features
feel like the sanctuary like there at
least one aspect of the industry that
has been getting better over time a
generous wealth of accessibility options
stuff I would not have expected
developers to let players get control
over a decade ago now seems to reliably
be included in all the big blockbuster
stuff the highest reviewed first-party
triple-a exclusive stuff that has a
keyway department
if if you go back and read some comments
from those Bioshock two days about a
decade ago you'll see a lot of
expressing frustration to accommodate
for colorblindness for the sake of
economic rationality you know we are a
minority it's between seven and twelve
percent of men
so did accessibility options turn out to
be profitable after all I think they are
there were some recent statistics on
subtitle data
ubisoft's explored and they tried
something recently they tried putting
subtitles on as a default and they
noticed that about 95% of their players
and written assassin's creed's
leave them on like people benefit from
these there I saw a statistic I think it
was a ga Kampf last year that of people
with physical disabilities 68 percent of
them play games regularly because it's a
thing they can do like them and for
anyone who moving around the world is
harder I would say it's a negligible
impact to support colorblindness to
supports blindness and total blindness
is an ambitious but approachable task
colorblind modes are usually divided up
into three categories that are kind of
extreme for the sake of simplicity
deuteron Opia for people who can't see
green light protanopia for people who
can't see red light and try to no Pia
for blue but in reality everyone's color
blindness is slightly different it's not
exactly an all-or-nothing situation like
the name suggests i'll get confused by
certain shades of all three of those
colors but it's usually with the last
two modes protanopia and triton Opia
when things will start to look weird or
just plain incorrect to me so the
deuteron opium mode is what I'll usually
stick with but even then the results
vary per game with the general caveat
being that the less the mode changes the
better developers please just stick to
changing the colors of UI elements and
other such strictly mechanical feedback
rather than attempting to change the
whole screens art for it remember that
those of us who are colorblind we've
spent our entire lives seeing the
world's beauty through this color
palette and we're appreciating it just
fine in my head through my eyes I'm not
gonna care let alone even be aware if
I'm not seeing the same environmental
art that the game's artists are seeing
but when it comes time to crunch numbers
and make decisions
that's what I'm gonna want to be on the
same page as everyone else the typical
example of a modern game doing this
wrong is doom 2016 who's colorblind
modes are more like colorblind
simulators or more like photo mode
filters the deuteron Opie option just
turns the Red Planet green it's not
fooling me this probably looks about as
green to you guys as it does to me
despite that I don't remember doom even
really needing a colorblind mode I
started the game with it turned on
thought it looked weird and turned it
off and then completely forgot about it
interestingly though and what further
supports the profitability of
accessibility is that these features end
up getting utilized by the mainstream
anyway and boy is that satisfying
eSports pros swear up and down over a
number of games that colorblind modes
help improve spot times and reaction
speeds well at the same time those modes
tend to be getting better and better for
those of us who do genuinely need them
battlefields been the gold standard
lately ever since a controversy similar
to Bioshock 2 hit battlefield 3 in 2011
apparently no one thought it would be
weird to ship a game with bright orange
bad guys versus bright green squad mates
until it was out it took them nine
months to issue a patch but ever since
then they've really been
overcompensating in battlefield 4 this
menu was a sight for actually sore eyes
three options for the three major types
of colorblindness
with the menu reassuring you that it's
just changing the UI and nothing else
with examples provided and now eight
years later the latest battlefields they
just let you straight up manually choose
UI colors there's not even any guesswork
so you worked on alien isolation right
indeed yes
what kind of consultation or tweaks did
you employ from your colorblindness to
make that one work I I came on to the
project with not too much time to go
like there was less than a year until
release however I did have one
colorblind issue in that game there are
the working Joe's the androids that go
around and their eyes are red when they
are aggressive but I couldn't see this
red it was this Roylott realization that
started spurring me on to the idea of
what was missing in development to make
this stuff accessible I had no idea that
those eyes went red at all I didn't know
there was a feature in that place
to denote visually that the androids
were aggressive the game was still
technically playable because of it there
was just a guessing game with who you
were hiding from so I realized that
there was a feature I was not aware of
and then the rest of the dev team was
not a vet aware of the problem and so it
was just a chance conversation I had
with another tester on the project
that's unenlightened me to the fact that
oh there it's a color feature there and
I can't see it this is a problem but
this was too late in development to do
something about it or at least too late
for me to convince anyone there was time
to solve the problem everyone was just
trying to ship the game so that was when
I realized right I have to this has to
be a campaign of information and
understanding so that would have been in
2014 go in 2015 around when the push for
accessibility options became a real
initiative across the whole industry and
2016 overwatch shipped with the
colorblind mode similar to doom 2016
which is more of a colorblind simulator
but after patches he can do the
battlefield thing and choose your own UI
colors adjusting how they contrast for
your monitor your room screenshots
videos dreams even for the map whether
you're colorblind or not this stuff is
useful titanfall 2 goes an even further
mile changing the lights on armor to
adjust for colorblind modes and
fortnight's colorblind options even have
a vision test built right into the
interface and that stuff is exactly what
I've been wanting and I didn't even know
I wanted it
now that is 2019 kids can find out
what's wrong with themselves while
fixing what's wrong with their games
[Music]
you